DM-32363 (#1)
lsst-dm/dmtn-210: index.rst

:tocdepth: 2

.. Please do not modify tocdepth; will be fixed when a new Sphinx theme is shipped.

.. sectnum::

Overview
========

> Rubin's Alert Distribution System is implemented in the integration environment at the interim data facility (the "IDF").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We describe the deployment of Rubin's Alert Distribution System in the integration environment at the interim data facility (the "IDF").
```

Reviewer: (Reword as desired, but "is implemented at the IDF" seems more permanent than I think we want.)

Reviewer: (notwithstanding the GCP-specific aspects described below)

The implementation runs on the shared Rubin Science Platform Kubernetes cluster in the IDF.

This document aims to be a point-in-time record of what exists, and to explain implementation decisions made during construction.
An overview is provided of the system's concepts and components, and then each is described in detail.

> At the highest conceptual level, it is composed of an Apache Kafka :cite:`kafka` cluster, a Confluent Schema Registry :cite:`confluent-schema-registry`, software to generate simulated alerts, and an alert database implemenntation following the design laid out in DMTN-183 :cite:`DMTN-183`.

Reviewer: cite DMTN-149 for the alert stream simulator

Reviewer: I'd also find a way to link in DMTN-093 for the overall design.

Terraform
---------

Terraform :cite:`terraform` is a tool for provisioning infrastructure through code.
On the Rubin Science Platform, Terraform is used to provision non-Kubernetes resources, such as Google Cloud Storage buckets and account permissions for applications running inside Kubernetes to access Google Cloud Platform APIs.

Terraform source code resides in the `lsst/idf_deploy`_ repository.

Principal Components
====================

The Alert Distribution System has six principal components:

1. The **Strimzi Operator** is responsible for managing a Kafka Cluster. It configures broker nodes, topics, and Kafka user identities.
2. The **Kafka Cluster** is an instance of Apache Kafka with several broker nodes and Zookeeper metadata nodes. It holds the actual alert packet data.
3. The **Strimzi Registry Operator** is responsible for managing a Confluent Schema Registry instance, correctly connecting it to the Kafka Cluster.
4. The **Schema Registry** is an instance of the Confluent Schema Registry, along with an ingress configured to allow read-only access from the internet by anonymous users.

> 5. The **Alert Stream Simulator** is a subsystem which encodes a static set of alerts and publishes them to the Kafka Cluster every 37 seconds.

Reviewer: I'd add something like, "During operations, alerts will instead by generated by the Alert Production pipelines."

These resources are defined with Helm templates in the `alert-stream-broker`_ chart.

The chart has the following subresources:

 1. A ``Kafka`` resource which defines the cluster's size, listeners, and core configuration, including that of the ZooKeeper nodes, in `kafka.yaml`_.
 2. A ``Certificate`` resource used to provision a TLS certificate for the Kafka cluster's external address, defined in `certs.yaml`_.
 3. A list of ``KafkaUsers`` used to create client identities that can access the Kafka Cluster, defined in `users.yaml`_ and `superusers.yaml`_.
 4. A ``VaultSecret`` used to store superuser credentials in Vault, which provides gated human access to the credential values through 1Password; see the `Phalanx Documentation on VaultSecrets <https://phalanx.lsst.io/service-guide/add-a-onepassword-secret.html>`__ for more details. This is defined in `vault_secret.yaml`_.

These will each now be explained in further detail.

``Kafka`` resource
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``Kafka`` resource is the primary configuration object of the Kafka cluster, defined in `kafka.yaml`_.

> There's a lot going on in its configuration; this section attempts to explain some of the most important sections without going every line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a lot going on in its configuration; this section attempts to explain some of the most important sections without going through every line.
```

.. _listeners:

Listeners
*********

The ``spec.kafka.listeners`` field of the resource defines the Kafka *listeners*, which are the network addresses which it opens to receive requests; this section is essential for configuring the Kafka cluster for both internal and external access.

Kafka's listeners are complicated, and configuring them through Kubernetes is even more so.
The Strimzi blog post series on "Accessing Kafka" :cite:`accessing-kafka`  provides very useful background for understanding this section.

We use three listeners: two internal listeners with ``tls`` authentication (meaning that clients need to use mTLS authentication to connect) and one external listener.

The first internal listener, on port 9092 and named 'internal', is used by applications internal to the Alert Distribution System, such as the Alert Database and Alert Stream Simulator.

> The second internal listener, on port 9093 and named 'tls', is used by the Schema Registry, since it the Strimzi Registry Operator is currently hardcoded to only use configure a Registry to connect to a listener with that name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second internal listener, on port 9093 and named 'tls', is used by the Schema Registry, since it the Strimzi Registry Operator is currently hardcoded to only use a Registry to connect to a listener with that name.
```

The deployment has a lot of configuration that needs to be explicitly specified in the `values-idfint.yaml`_ file, such as the (Kubernetes) ServiceAccount name and the Google Cloud Platform project ID.

Server
~~~~~~

The server has a Deployment (in `server-deployment.yaml`_) and a ServiceAccount (in `server-serviceaccount.yaml`_).
The Deployment uses the ServiceAccount to assert an identity that it uses to make API calls to Google Cloud when storing object in Google Cloud Storage Buckets.
That ServiceAccount needs permissions to read objects from the alert packet and schema buckets.

The server also runs a health check endpoint, at /v1/health, which is used by Kubernetes to tell when the container is successfully up and running.

Aside from that, the server is almost a transparent proxy for requests to Google Cloud.
It caches responses from the schema bucket for efficiency, and it decompresses the gzipped alert packets out of the storage bucket.

Ingress (and Service)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ingress (in `alert-database/templates/ingress.yaml`_) provides external access to the Alert Database server.

> In order to do so, we also need a Service, which is a Kubernetes abstraction which allows a Deployment to be targettable by an Ingress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to do so, we also need a Service, which is a Kubernetes abstraction which allows a Deployment to be targetable by an Ingress.
```
